Data
====

Training Data
-------------

The dataset covers **210 basins** across 3 hydroclimatic tiers — Tier 1
(89 warm, rainfall-dominated), Tier 2 (92 transitional rain-snow), and
Tier 3 (29 cold, snow-dominated).

- **Climate forcing**: Daily precipitation (mm), tmax (°C), tmin (°C),
  area-weighted from gridded sources. Records span 1915–2018 (~38k days).
- **Streamflow**: Daily records from USGS, variable per basin (typically
  1950s–present). Converted from cfs to mm/day using raw basin area
  (``q × 2.44577 / area_km²``).
- **Static attributes**: 18 features derived from BasinATLAS and climate
  statistics — watershed geometry (area, mean elevation, slope), river
  network characteristics (river area, network density, stream gradient),
  soil/surface (forest fraction, clay/sand fraction, climate and
  lithology classes), and long-term climate normals (aridity index, snow
  fraction, PET, precipitation mean, and high/low precipitation frequency
  and duration).

Normalisation
-------------

- **Flow targets**: Converted cfs → mm/day using raw basin area, then
  divided by each basin's **mean daily precipitation (mm/day)** computed
  from its own climate record. The result is a dimensionless per-day
  runoff ratio. This scale is universally computable for any basin with
  a climate file (training watersheds, HUC8, HUC10, or elsewhere), so
  inference on unseen basins does not require observed flow.
- **Climate inputs**: z-score normalised globally using training-basin
  statistics only.
- **Static attributes**: z-score normalised globally using training basins.
  ``total_Shape_Area_km2`` and ``ria_ha_usu`` are log10-transformed first
  (the raw area is retained for the mm/day conversion before the log).

Validation
----------

5-fold stratified spatial cross-validation. Basins — not timesteps — are
the unit of splitting. Each fold holds out ~20 % of each tier.
**No watershed appears in both train and validation within a fold.** Every
basin is evaluated exactly once as if ungauged, testing the model's ability
to generalise to basins it has never seen.

Primary metrics are per-tier median NSE, KGE, FHV, FEHV, and FLV.

External Comparison
-------------------

Process-based model outputs from the California Energy Commission (CEC)
are available for overlapping basins, enabling direct comparison between
data-driven and physics-based approaches.

The comparison data comes from the **VIC (Variable Infiltration Capacity)** model,
generated by UCLA as part of the CEC's Climate Data and Analysis Working Group (`C-DAWG
<https://www.energy.ca.gov/programs-and-topics/topics/research-and-development/climate-data-and-analysis-working-group-c-dawg>`_).
These models were forced with a subset of LOCA2-hybrid and dynamically
downscaled WRF climate data to produce daily hydrologic simulations across
California.

References:

- Bass, B. et al. (2025). *Hydrology Projections — Data Justification Memo*.
  California Climate Change Assessment.
  (`PDF <https://www.energy.ca.gov/sites/default/files/2025-04/05_HydrologyProjections_DataJustificationMemo_BassEtAl_Adopted_v3_ada.pdf>`_)
- CEC. *Noah-MP & VIC Hydrology Model Description*.
  (`PDF <https://wrf-cmip6-noversioning.s3.amazonaws.com/ben_temp/d03_3km/CEC/0_Hyd_Model_Documentation/CEC_Noah_MP_VIC_Hydrology_Model_Description.pdf>`_)
- Cal-Adapt Analytics Engine — Related Datasets.
  (`Link <https://analytics.cal-adapt.org/data/more_data/>`_)
